.TH RPI-PRESEED 5 "2026" "rpi-preseed" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
rpi-preseed.toml \- first-boot OS customisation configuration for Raspberry Pi OS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B /boot/firmware/rpi-preseed.toml
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpi-preseed
reads a single TOML file on first boot and applies it from booted systemd
oneshots, reusing the Raspberry Pi helper scripts with POSIX-shell fallbacks.
The config location may be overridden with the kernel command line argument
.BR rpi_preseed.config= .
.PP
Known keys are validated strictly; unknown keys and sections are ignored with a
warning for forward compatibility. See
.B config_version
below.
.SH SECTIONS
.TP
.B config_version
Semantic version string "MAJOR.MINOR" (required). Major must match the tool's
supported major; a higher minor produces a warning and best-effort application.
.TP
.B [system]
.B hostname
= string. Must be a valid RFC 1123 hostname (ASCII letters, digits and hyphens;
each label 1-63 characters; no leading/trailing hyphen). Internationalised names
are not supported.
.TP
.B [user]
.BR name ", " password ", " password_encrypted " (bool), " passwordless_sudo " (bool), " groups " (array)."
The rename is performed before any login can start.
.B groups
lists supplementary groups to add the primary (UID 1000) account to; membership is
append-only, so existing groups are preserved. Most notably, listing
.B sudo
grants the account the ability to run
.BR sudo " (still password-gated); use " passwordless_sudo
for an unprompted sudoers drop-in. Groups that do not exist on the image are
warned and skipped rather than failing the apply. Groups and sudo are applied to
the effective account even when no rename or password is configured.
.TP
.B [ssh]
.BR enabled ", " password_authentication " (bool), " ssh_import_id " (array), " authorized_keys " (array)."
.TP
.B [wlan]
.BR ssid ", " ssid_hex ", " password ", " password_encrypted ", " hidden ", " country ", " key_mgmt .
Written as a NetworkManager preconfigured connection.
.B ssid_hex
carries a non-UTF-8 SSID as a hex string (an even run of hex digits) and takes
precedence over
.BR ssid ;
it is always written via the native NetworkManager writer as a byte-array.
.B key_mgmt
is
.BR none " (open), " owe " (WPA3 Enhanced Open), " wpa-psk
(WPA2 and WPA2/WPA3 transition APs) or
.BR sae " (WPA3-Personal only)."
When omitted it defaults to
.B wpa-psk
if a password is given, otherwise
.BR none .
Open networks
.RB ( none / owe )
must not set a password; secured networks
.RB ( wpa-psk / sae )
require one.
.B password
may contain UTF-8 and is validated by octet length: for
.B wpa-psk
it must be 8-63 octets (or a raw 64-hex-digit PMK); for
.B sae
it need only be non-empty. Set
.B password_encrypted
to pass a pre-computed value through unchecked.
.TP
.B [ethernet]
.BR method " (dhcp|static|disabled), " address ", " gateway ", " dns " (array), " dns_search " (array), " interface .
A single wired connection written as a NetworkManager keyfile.
.B method
defaults to
.BR dhcp .
.B static
requires
.B address
in IPv4 CIDR notation (e.g.
.IR 192.168.1.50/24 );
.BR gateway ", " dns " and " dns_search
are only valid with
.BR static .
.B interface
optionally binds the profile to a named device (e.g.
.IR eth0 ).
.TP
.B [locale]
.BR keymap ", " timezone ", " locales " (array), " lang ", " lc_time ", " lc_measurement ", " keymap_model ", " keymap_variant ", " keymap_options " (array)."
Exceeds Raspberry Pi Imager: full locale generation and XKB control.
.TP
.B [time]
.BR ntp " (array), " fallback_ntp " (array)."
NTP server lists written as a
.B systemd-timesyncd
drop-in
.RB ( /etc/systemd/timesyncd.conf.d/10-rpi-preseed.conf ).
The timezone is set via
.BR [locale].timezone .
.TP
.B [connect]
.BR enabled ", " mode " (token|device-identity), " token .
.B token
is required if and only if
.B mode
is "token".
.TP
.B [interfaces]
.BR i2c ", " spi ", " onewire " (bool), " serial " (enum), " usb_gadget " (bool)."
.TP
.B [ca_certificates]
.B files
(array). Extra trusted CA certificates referenced by file. Each name is resolved
next to the config on the boot partition (or as an absolute path), staged into
.IR /usr/local/share/ca-certificates ", and registered with"
.BR update-ca-certificates .
A PEM cannot be embedded inline because the config format carries no newlines.
.TP
.B [mounts]
.B fstab
(array). Each entry is a complete
.BR fstab (5)
line
.RB ( "<spec> <mountpoint> <fstype> <options> <dump> <pass>" ).
Lines are appended idempotently and the mountpoint directory is created; mounts
take effect on the next boot.
.TP
.B [boot]
.BR config_txt " (array, appended to config.txt), " cmdline_txt " (string, appended to cmdline.txt)."
.TP
.B [runcmd]
.B early
(array) runs in the booted system before the network is up and is held to a
tight budget \(em fast, local operations only. Commands slower than a few seconds
belong in
.BR late .
.B late
(array) runs after the network is up, behind a readiness gate (clock sync and
apt/dpkg lock release) with per-command retry and backoff. Tunables:
.BR early_cmd_timeout ", " late_require_time_sync ", " late_wait_for_apt_lock ", "
.BR late_gate_timeout ", " late_retries ", " late_retry_delay ", " late_retry_max_delay .
All commands run under continue-and-log.
.TP
.B [packages]
.BR update " (bool), " upgrade " (bool), " install " (array), " remove " (array)."
Declarative
.BR apt-get
package management, applied in the late phase (post-network, behind the same
readiness gate as
.BR [runcmd].late )
and before late commands, so those commands may rely on the installed packages.
.B update
refreshes the index (also implied by
.BR install / upgrade );
.B upgrade
performs a
.BR "dist-upgrade" .
Each step is retried with backoff using the
.B late_retry_*
tunables.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B /var/lib/rpi-preseed/
Stamps (applied, early-runcmd-done, runcmd-done, apply-failed), logs, and report.json.
.TP
.B /boot/firmware/rpi-preseed/
Redacted status breadcrumb and collect-logs bundles.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rpi-preseed (8)
.SH NOTES
Secrets are removed and PII is tokenised in all logs and diagnostics bundles.
